My name is Fred Gray and I’m an attorney from Tuskegee and Montgomery, Alabama. On Wednesday the 3rd of February, 2010, attending the Association for Student Conduct Administration Annual Meeting in St. Petersburg Beach, Florida. I was invited to be the keynote speaker at the opening session of that meeting of university and college students whose primary responsibility deals with the protection of student rights. This year, they wanted to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the case of St. John Dickson and Others vs. the Alabama State Board of Education, a case which originated in Montgomery, Alabama. In 1960 as a result of the students demonstrating at lunch counters at A&T College in Greensboro, North Carolina, and the students at Alabama State realizing what the students in North Carolina was doing and knowing that they were in the city of Montgomery and that Montgomery was the site of the Montgomery Bus Boycott and that there were young leaders involved in that boycott including Dr. Martin Luther King, Ralph Abernathy, Fred Gray, and others and all of them were not too far removed age-wise than the students at A&T and the students at Alabama state wanted to make their contribution. As a result of the sit-ins, the Public Accommodation Act was passed, but even more importantly as a motivating factor for the passage of that act, African American students at most of the African American colleges and universities in the South, the African American students decided to make their contributions by sitting in at lunch counters. At Alabama State, they elected and planned and executed a sit-in at the lunch counter at the Montgomery County Courthouse. When they commenced the demonstration, the sheriff was called. He ended up closing the lunch counter, asked the students to move out, and they moved into the hall, and they remained in the hall for about an hour. But unlike what had happened in other communities, Mac Sim Butler did not arrest those students. The Governor of the state, John Patterson, immediately got in touch with Dr. Trenholm, who was president of Alabama State, directed him to make an investigation. Subsequently, the State Board of Education, on the recommendation of governor Patterson, had Dr. Trenholm to expel those students who were non-residents of Alabama and place the ones on suspend those who were residents of the state.
